If you search for flutter provider, you should end up on this page here on PUP, not death with the
provider package.
And there you find some documentation about how to use it.
Definitely interesting.
But of course, that's not what I will do to cover with you.
We will start using it.
And for that, you, first of all have to install it, which you do by simply copying this entry here
and installing tap on the package page.
Now, go back to your project there in the pub Speckled YAML file at this entry below your plodder dependancy
here and make sure the indentation is correct because indentation matters.
Once you save that file, flutter should automatically go ahead and fetch these packages.
If it doesn't do that, you can run flutter packages, get in your terminal, navigated into this project
folder with that, the provider packages installed.
And of course, the question is now, how do we use it?
Now, a provider in the end needs to be defined with the help of a class and you then build a new provider
based on the class definition.
Now, a provider or diskless you create is also often referred to as a model because you all the kind
of model your data there, the data in your app, which then changes.
Now, I'm already using the term model here, though, and I'm using it here to define my my data class
as my data types, which I have like a product here.
And that is not really something I want to provide because a single product is just a single object
I use.
What I want to manage here with the state management solution is something bigger, a list of all my
products, not just a single product.
Now, therefore, I will create a new subfolder here and name it providers to set up my classes that
define these bigger state management definitions, these bigger data definitions for my app, so to
say, the data, which also changes over time and which I want to reflect.
So here in providers, I'll add a new file.
And named at.
Products, dot, dart, you can also name it products underscore provider if you want to make this differentiation
really clear.
Now in the products dot dart file.
You define a new class and all name that class products, however, now here you don't just have a class
like this.
Instead, you need to add a mix in.
I mentioned mix ins early and of course, already you add makes sense by adding the with keyword.
And then the name of the mix in a mix in is a bit like extending Navarra class.
The core difference is that you simply merge some properties or some methods into your existing class,
but you don't return your class into an instance of that inherited class.
It's a bit like inheritance lite, so to say.
And the class we need to mix it here is to change notifier class, which is built into flatter and which
you enabled by importing the flatter material dard package here.
Change Notifier is basically kind of related to the inherited widget which the provider package uses
behind the scenes and inherited widget, whilst we won't work with it directly, is simply a widget
and flutter, which allows us to establish behind the scenes communication.
Tunnell's with the help of the context object which we're getting in every widget.
So this product class now mixes in the changed notifier here and you'll see why we add this mix in in
a second.
Now, you can define whatever you want at this class.
And here I want to define a list of products.
So I'll first of all, import.
My product model whips only with one slash year, and I'll store a list of products here in the products
class.
So I'll have a list which will hold product data in the end, and I'll name does underscore items,
you could also just name it items.
I just want to make it really clear that this property here should never be directly accessible from
outside.
And I'll also show why do this in a second.
So I have my underscore items in there and that's not a final list because it will change over time.
And with that, I mean the value here in the items property, not just the items in the list, because
as you learned, you can also change items in the list that is final.
But here I really want to change the value that's stored in the property itself.
Before we change anything, however, let's actually make sure we can fetch these items.
And since I turned this into a private property by adding the underscore, which means it can't be accessed
from outside, I'll add a letter here which will return a list of products and then it's a gater by
adding to get keyword, which is named items without the underscore.
And in there I return my items, but not like this.
Instead I return a copy of them, which I do buy wrapping items here into square brackets and then by
using the spread operator.
Now why am I doing this?
You have to remember that all these objects and flutter were entered are reference types.
If I would return my items list here, then I would return a pointer at this object in memory.
Right.
That's what you learned earlier in the course.
And that means that anywhere in the code where I get access to my products class here and where I then
get access to the items, I get that address and therefore I get direct access to this list of items
itself in memory.
And hence I could start editing this list of items from anywhere else in the app where I tap into this
product class.
I don't want to do that and I don't want to do that because when my products change, I actually have
to call a certain method.
To tell all the listeners of this provider, remember to slide, you have the provider and you have
listeners, that new data is available.
So let's say we had an ad product method here which returns nothing and which for the moment doesn't
take an argument.
And then here we would simply add something to our items.
Then, of course, we typically would have the problem that if we change data here in this class, how
would we let all our widgets or the widgets that are interested know about this?
And that's why we had this change notifier, because that gives us access to a notify listeners method,
because always keep in mind, diskless will soon be used by the provider package, which uses inherited
widget behind the scenes, and therefore it will establish a communication channel between diskless
and widgets that are interested for us.
And we need to let those widgets know about updates that we did with not notify listeners so that Indie's
widgets, which are listening to disclose and to changes in this class, are then rebuilt and do actually
get the latest data we have in there.
And that's why I return a copy so that we can directly edit our items here from anywhere else in the
app, because if we want to do that, we could not call notify listeners because we can only do this
from inside this class, because there we added this mix in and hence our widgets that depend on the
data and here would not rebuild correctly because they wouldn't know about the change.
So we have to make sure that we only change data from inside the class because then we can trigger notify
listeners and all the other parts of the app that are listening to this class will then get rebuilt.
This might not be entirely clear yet because we're not listening yet, but that's the general idea of
why I do it like this.
And for the moment, I'll comment this out, because for the moment, we don't really know how to add
products.
But that's the idea why we have changed notifier and why we need to set up and why I return a copier.
But we've said let's start listening and before we can start listening, we, first of all, need to
provide this.
Thus far we have to class, but now we need to turn this class here into a data container, into a provider
which we can use in our app and in the different parts of our app and dare the products are important.
A couple of places of this app, of course, they are important.
In the product detail and the product overview screen for the moment, that means that I want to provide
this in the main dart follow because that's important and that's something you have to know if the provider
package, you need to provide a class which you then want to use from different widgets in your app
at the highest possible point of all these widgets which will be interested, which means that if the
product overview and the product details green are interested in the data, I have to provide the class
in a widget that is above them, which in my case is this my app widget, my rude widget.
If I had data which is only important to the product item widget, that I could provide that data in
the product overview widget because that is where I create the product item.
No need to then manage it in the main darte file.
But here, since I have widgets which are registered on the root level, I need to also provide my data
on the root level.
By the way, that will not mean that the entire app will rebuild whenever something changes in the data
though.
But more than that in a second.
So I want to provide my data here and therefore let's import our provider or disclose.
We just worked on from providers and data from the product standard file and now we can set up a provider
here.
Now, how do we register a provider in our app then?
To register a provider, you need to import something from that provider package because there is a
reason why we added it after all.
Right, so import provider D'Arte from the provider package and now here in your Myalup widget instead
of returning material app, will actually wrap this into another widget.
So rap with new widget and new widget.
Is now a provider, and there you've got a couple of providers available, the most common provider,
which I would recommend using, is to change notifier.
Provider, and that's a clause provided by the provider package, which we installed, it allows us
to register a class to which you can then listen in child widgets and whenever that class updates the
widgets which are listening, and only these not all child widgets, only child widgets which are listening,
will rebuild.
So here.
You then have to provide a builder method.
That builder method will receive a built context, and it should return a new instance of your provided
class.
So not a widget, a new instance of your provided class.
So in our case of the products class here, so here I simply return products like this.
Now, one important note at this point, though, the builder method here is the right method to choose
if you are using Worsham free of the provider package.
So if you have, for example, this dependancy in your pop speckled YAML file, if you are using the
latest version or specifically a version greater than or equal to four.
So if you, for example, have this entry in your perspective YAML file, then this will not work with
Builder instead.
Then it's create.
And just like that, you simply have to create instead of builder in that case.
Now, I did record this cause with version three, which is why you will see Builder in this video and
the next videos and you can absolutely use version free of the provider package.
All you need to do is have this extra year in your perspective YAML file.
For example, if you have this, you can just follow along with Builder, but if you want to use the
latest version, then you have to use create here.
So if you have version four or higher, then you need to create here.
So don't be confused if you see something different in the next lecture's.
That's just because I used a different version.
Now, one thing that does not change is how the provider package works, what it does and so on.
So that's all the same.
Only this part here needs adjustment.
Just wanted to point this out here.
Now, we set up a provider which provides an instance and one in the same instance of this product,
class to all child widgets, so material upon all its children, which are interested.
So all child widgets can now set up a listener to this instance of this class, to this same instance,
the same object of this class.
And whenever we change something in the class and we then call notify listeners, the widgets which
are listening will be rebuilt.
And that's very important, only the widgets which are listening, not the whole material.
So just because something changes in here will not rebuild material app, it will only rebuild widgets,
which are listening.
Now, where is the place where we could be interested?
Well, the products overview, they're.
Here in the products review, I have my grid view builder, so I need my products here now, actually,
you could even argue to not unnecessarily rebuild the APA, which doesn't need any product data that
we outsource.
Does grid view builder into a separate widget so we can wrap this used to refactoring tool and use extract
widget here and give us a name of products gret.
Maybe now we have that new widget which is created for us.
And that should actually not received the product as an argument, but get it itself by actually using
our provider.
Now, first of all, I'll move my product cred here into a new file.
Technically, you don't need to do that, but I rather follow that convention.
So when products grit foul in there, of course, you need to import your material, dart, fall from
flutter and also import the product model because we're referring to it here.
And that's important, the product model, so our normal model in the models folder, not the products
file we just worked on, but the normal model here.
I also need to reference product item in here because I'm using it, so let's import.
Product item.
In the products overview screen, we now don't need that product item import anymore.
I also want to grab the dummy products we have in here and moved them away out of that widget into the
product start fault in the provider's folder, because, dear, we have these products and I want to
start with some dummy products for now so that in the products overview screen, we don't need that
anymore.
We don't need the product model import anymore.
Therefore we just need to import that new.
Products grade from the widgets folder, so products start.
And we don't need a new keyword, so products grade.
Products grid is what I should import, and now products grid is created here in the products grid widget
don't need that constructor or anything off that.
I want to fetch all my data in here instead by setting up such a listener.
And for dad and to build method, we can now use another feature from the provider package and hence
let's import package.
Provider provider here and that our feature is provider of context.
Now, we've seen that off context thing a couple of times throughout the course already with the theme
with the navigator and so on.
I've already explained there that this sets up a direct communication channel behind the scenes.
And this year, the provider package allows us to set up a connection to one of the provided classes.
And therefore, you can only use provider off in a widget which has some direct or indirect parranda
widget which set up a provider, which we did here.
So that needs to be set up first, that provider, but then we can listen with provider off to changes
in that provided class or in that provided object to be precise.
And this build method of this widget where I'm using provider off and only this build method and of
course all the child widgets will rebuild whenever the object I'm listening to changes the build method
of a parent widget of products.
Gret, like the product overview here, will not rerun because we're not setting up a listener here.
And that's of course, important.
Not the entire widget tree does rebuild if data changes.
Only the widget where I'm listening.
And of course, then because this bill, it runs all the child widgets are rebuilt to, that's the normal
behavior.
The question, though, is how do we set up a connection between this widget and then this specific
provider?
Right now we only have one provider, but actually, as you will later also see, you can have more
than one provider in your app.
So I want to set up a listen to my provider, which actually provides me an instance of my products
class.
You tell Slotter or to provide a package that you're interested in an instance of that products class
by taking advantage of the fact that the off method here on the provider class provided by the provider
package is a generic method, which means you can add these Anglet brackets to let it know to which
type of data you actually want to listen to.
So here I want to listen to changes in products and now it's import that now has to be products.
So here we import.
From the providers folder there from the product Start Fall.
With this piece of information, we're telling the provider package that we want to establish a direct
communication channel to the provided instance of the products class and now the provider package goes
ahead and looks at the parent of products caret the products overview screen, and there it finds no
provider.
So it goes ahead and has a look at the parent of the product or review screen.
And that's, of course, are my app widget because that's where I'm instantiating the products overview
screen.
And there if it goes up the widget tree, it indeed defines a provider.
And in that provider, thankfully, it finds a provider which thankfully provides an instance of type
products.
If we would create a different class here, then setting up this listener, of course, would fail.
But since we do provide a new products object here, we can tap into it and listen to it here with provider
of products context.
So this here gives us access to this product object.
So named as products data, and that's not our list of products, but to the object based on this class,
and this will then have items, Geter, because we added it here.
So the products we actually work with are then.
Simply fetch from products data.
By accessing items like this, and this now gives us a list of products and since type inference works
here, we actually don't need a product model imported because we don't need the product itself here
in the products.
With that, we now get our products here and we can now use the products here to determine the length
and then forward that data to the product item in the product item.
As I explained earlier, in this module, I'm fine with getting the state as an argument because this
is data which does widget itself needs, which we don't just get to forwarded, but which we want to
output in that widget.
And therefore it's fine to accept it like this.
It's actually recommended to get it like this because then it's very clear to see which configuration
does which it needs to work correctly.
And you can drop this widget anywhere into your app where, you know, you get this data no matter if
you have a provider above it or not.
So with that was a lot of talking, but very important.
Let's do a full restart now.
And in our app, we now still see our items here, but now we're actually loading them with the help
of our provider class.
And the advantage, if not already evident, will become more and more clear the more complex our application
gets.